GSoC Admin Expectations

In GSoC, Organization Administrators have the responsiblity of making
sure the organization's involvement in the program goes smoothly,
that appropriate communication is happening, and some administrivia.
Here's what to expect from your org admins.

This year, the primary admin is Anthony Sorace; the backup mentor is
Erik Quanstrom.

 *	Organization admins will complete all the required forms,
	registration materials, organization profiles, and so on, in a
	timely manner.

 *	Admins will follow at least the weekly project reports from
	students and mentors to ensure work is progressing. In the event
	that these aren't coming in as expected, admins will contact the
	mentors first, and then the students if necessary.

 *	Admins will actively contact each mentor on a weekly basis (most
	likely Monday or Tuesday, after the weekly status reports from
	students have gone out) to ensure that all's going well. In the
	event of problems, admins will take corrective action, most likely
	communicating with the backup mentor(s) and then the students.

 *	Admins will check in with students at the beginning of the
	community bonding period, the beginning of the code period, once
	before midterm, and once a week or so before the suggested "pencils
	down" date, to ensure their communications with their mentors are
	going well. Admins will not try to inject themselves into the
	student-mentor relationship, but should make sure the student is
	having a productive and enjoyable time.

 *	Admins will check completion of student and mentor midterm and
	final reviews and will provide gentle reminders of unfinished forms
	as the deadlines near.

 *	In the event both the primary and backup mentors become
	unavailable, org admins will be prepared to either find another
	suitable mentor from the community or, as a last resort, serve as an
	intermediary to the community generally.

 *	In all cases above, actions to be performed by "admins" will be
	expected of the primary admin, with the backup following along well
	enough to pick up tasks in case the primary gets hit by a bus or
	goes awol.

