Web browsers

Plan9 has several options for web browsers, though none supports
perfectly the most complex(or broken) websites some of them are quite
useable.

ABACO

As of July 2009 the lightweight web browser abaco is now distributed
as part of the stock Plan 9 distribution. It is a web browser that
started as a rewrite of webpage, with many new improvements including
tables support. A testing snapshot can be found at:
/n/sources/contrib/fgb

CHARON

Charon is the web browser supplied with the Inferno OS. It supports
Javascript and https. It has very few features (a good thing) but
requires the inferno runtime environment. Charon is packaged as part
of [Inferno | http://www.vitanuova.com/inferno/downloads.html]

WEBPAGE

webfs(4) and html(2) were written at Bell labs as the backend for a
new web browser; unfortunately the project stalled. Aki Nyrhinen has
since written a simple frontend called webpage for these which does
an amazingly good job of rendering basic web pages; it also makes
interesting use of the plumber to support hyperlinks. This work also
stalled and has been superseded by abaco.

LINKS

Links is a graphical web browser which renders pages fairly well. It
is not quite stable, crashing on some pages but usable for google
searches and the like. It supports CSS and javascript but not java or
https (though this would not take a great deal to fix). The current
implementation is fairly graphics hungry and should be run on a local
terminal for best peformance. The greatest annoyance with links is
the lack of support for cut and paste between links windows and the
plan9 snarf buffer. The source is availabe in Andrey Mirtchov's
[contrib] dir: /n/sources/contrib/andrey/links.tgz

MOTHRA

Mothra was written by Tom Duff for the second edition of plan9. It is
very basic and does not support ftp, java, javascript, https or CSS.
On the other hand it is very fast and compiles natively for plan9.
The sources relies on the second edition panel library which has also
been released, see /n/sources/extra/mothra.

HGET | HTMLFMT

The plan9 tools hget(1) and htmlfmt(1) can be used to fetch and
render simple web pages but are most useful for scripted fetches
(e.g. ap(1))

VNC TO WINDOWS OR *NIX

The best way to get a fully supported web browser under plan9 is to
use the vnc client to connect to a linux or Windows box. This
performs very well if used over a fast network connection.

