GSoC 2008 Student Guidelines


REQUIREMENTS FOR STUDENT PARTICIPATION

We want every student experience to be productive and educational,
and we understand that for many students this will be a larger and
more open-ended kind of project than you have previously completed.
We believe that open and frequent communication is vital in helping
you succeed.

Experience gained through previous Google Summer of Code efforts and
other mentoring and management activities over the years has led us
to establish these requirements for student participation. We
understand that some students may find themselves temporarily unable
to meet these requirements due to events beyond their control, such
as unexpected work, school, or family demands. However, long-term
failure to meet these requirements will result in removal from the
program.

 *	The sole storage for your GSoC work cannot be a personally-owned
	machine. This means that every week, or more frequently, your work
	must be copied to a server operated by the Plan 9 GSoC project or
	committed to a Google Code repository.

 *	Every Sunday, by your local midnight, your project's top-level
	CHANGELOG file must be updated. Your mentor and the project
	administrators will scan for status updates at least as frequently
	as every Monday at their local noon.

 *	Before the coding period begins, you and your mentor will agree on
	at least one milestone to be reached before the mid-term evaluation.

 *	Your mentor will be expected to remove you from the program at the
	time of the mid-term evaluation unless your repository and changelog
	have been up-to-date and you have met the agreed-upon milestone.

APPLICATION HINTS

 *	If you aren't yet a user of Plan 9 or Inferno, please understand
	that these systems are fundamentally different from what you're used
	to. This is why we like and use them, but you should expect that
	getting started will require a genuine investment in reading and a
	willingness to do everything a different way than you're used to.

 *	If you are proposing a 9P/Styx project which will not run on Plan
	9 or Inferno (e.g., an embedded-system project or a Linux/BSD/*ix
	project), we expect your design and implementation will benefit from
	a healthy understanding of "the mother ship".

 *	If at all possible, read up on Plan 9 and/or Inferno (see papers
	on the web site) and complete an installation before finalizing your
	application.

 *	You should subscribe to the 9fans mailing list as soon as possible
	and commit to keeping up with it. While most GSoC-related traffic
	will be carried on a dedicated mailing list, discussions on 9fans
	will provide useful background context, and we hope that after
	following it for a few weeks you will chime in as appropriate.

 *	Try to make it clear in your application that you understand the
	parts of the problem and how difficult they are. A conservative plan
	with some clearly achievable milestones will probably be more
	attractive than an all-or-none "big bang" plan.

GETTING HELP

Don't panic! We do not expect all incoming summer students to have
been born knowing:
 *	how to read 20,000 lines of code and see how the parts fit together
 *	how to debug obscure installation problems of obscure operating
	systems
 *	how to guess which way a piece of hardware deviates from its
	documentation
 *	how to make and adjust a development schedule In general, when you
	don't know what to do next, ask somebody.

For problems related to installation, configuration, source control,
and debugging tools, we recommend that you start with the #plan9
and/or #inferno IRC channels on irc.freenode.org. If help is not
available in real-time via IRC, we suggest sending mail to the
plan9-gsoc mailing list.

For issues specific to your project, do not hesitate to contact your
mentor. Furthermore, it will generally make the most sense for these
communications to include both your mentor and your backup mentor.

If you feel the relationship with your mentor is not going well,
please do not hesitate to contact the Plan 9 GSoC administrator.
Personality conflicts do arise between well-meaning people and we
will work to resolve issues as well as we can. Please realize,
however, that it is important for you to get help right away: the
role of the project administrator is to help you make forward
progress so you can meet deadlines, not to override a mentor's
correct observation that program requirements are not being met.

