GSoC Student Expectations

We're excited to get applications from students with a wide range of
backgrounds, experience levels, and interests. To ensure everyone has
the best experience possible, here are a few guidelines for students
thinking about applying to work with Plan 9 or related technologies
in Google Summer of Code.

SKILLS

The primary skill needed to work well with Plan 9 or related projects
is an ability to think creatively about problems. While the Unix
lineage of all these tools is clear, we do a number of things
differently. Students should be prepared to be working in a somewhat
unfamiliar - but very exciting! - environment.

If you're working on Plan 9 itself, your project will almost
certainly be done in C. We use a dialect of ANSI C with a few
restrictions, a few extensions, and a more limited pre-processor. If
you're good with ANSI C, it'll be an easy transition. There is a tiny
bit of assembly in the platform support; if you're working on a port
you may need to be able to handle that.

For Inferno, the kernel is written in C while all the applications
are written in Limbo, a high-level language vaguely similar to C (and
an ideological ancestor to Go). If you're familiar with C or other
C-family languages, it should be a relatively easy learning curve. If
you're looking to work on a project for Inferno and are not already
familiar with Limbo, you should get at least a high-level familiarity
while preparing your application to GSoC and be prepared to be
reasonably proficient before the start of the coding period.

Skill requirements for other projects will vary with the specifics.
For example, v9fs will require C work in the style used by the Linux
kernel, while 9p/styx servers in other languages could be done
entirely in those languages. If a project on our ideas page has
particular skill requirements beyond these, we'll list them there.

EXPECTATIONS

Over the course of the summer, students will be engaged in a project
with their mentor that is designed to be educational, productive, and
fill a summer. To ensure that this goes well, students should be
prepared for the following:

 *	Students are, of course, expected to follow all Google's rules for
	the program, and to have read the [Student Handbook |
	http://en.flossmanuals.net/GSoCStudentGuide/]. This includes filling
	out the midterm and final evaluations in a timely manner.

 *	As with GSoC generally, our students are expected to be working on
	their project more or less full-time. In particular, this means you
	are unlikely to be successful if you have other intensive
	commitments, like an unrelated full-time job or extensive travel
	plans.

 *	Students will be expected to be in regular contact with their
	mentors. You should discuss exactly what this means with your
	mentor, but it likely means every day or two initially. This
	daily(-ish) contact needn't be particularly in-depth, but should
	indicate what you've been doing since the last such contact. Lines
	from a changelog or commit messages would be great to include here,
	but discuss the exact form with your mentor.

 *	You'll be epxected to make a weekly report every Monday to the
	plan9-gsoc mailing list. This should give a reasonably detailed
	account of what you've done over the past week. You needn't give
	line-by-line code review, but it should be enough so that casual
	readers of the list know what you've been up to.

 *	Students must keep their code in a publicly-available place, with
	updates every day or so reflecting the current state of things.
	Don't worry: if it doesn't compile for a few days nobody's going to
	hunt you down, but we need to be able to see what you're working on
	to make sure you're not heading off in unproductive directions. This
	year, acceptable repositories are limited to mercurial repositories
	on [bitbucket | http://bitbucket.org] or a contrib directory on
	sources, the main community 9p server. Discuss with your mentor
	which option works best for your project.

 *	Each student will be assigned a backup mentor. This mentor may not
	have much day to day interaction with you, but will be following
	along in case they're needed. Keep them in the loop by CC'ing them
	on any mail sent to your mentor (and not sent to the plan9-gsoc
	list).

 *	In the unlikely event that your mentor becomes uncommunicative or
	unresponsive, let your backup mentor and organization admins know
	right away.

